= Ritzy Design
:toc:
:sectanchors:

== General Information

See the https://github.com/ritzyed/ritzy/blob/master/README.adoc[README] for
general information about Ritzy.

[[collaboration]]
== Real-time Character-by-character Collaborative Editing

=== Causal Tree CRDT

Ritzy's real-time collaborative editing uses a different approach than Google
Docs, which based on public information is based on
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Operational_transformation[operational transform]
(OT). Operational transforms require implementing a transform for every
operation, and dealing specially with lots of corner cases, especially as the
complexity of the model increases.

Instead, Ritzy uses operation-based
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conflict-free_replicated_data_type[conflict free
replicated data types] (CRDTs), specifically a
http://www.pds.ewi.tudelft.nl/~victor/polo.pdf[causal tree], to implement the
concurrency control required for real-time character-by-character collaborative
editing. Just like OT, CRDTs allow changes to happen in different orders on each
instance, but the final editor state to converge.

==== Character IDs

NOTE: This is a simplification. Read the
http://www.pds.ewi.tudelft.nl/~victor/polo.pdf[causal trees paper] by Victor
Grishchenko for details. Errors in the text below are our own.

Essentially, with causal trees, every character has a unique id made up of a
http://swarmjs.github.io/articles/lamport/[Lamport timestamp and some other
information]. All operations and positioning is relative to these ids rather
than character count offsets.

==== Merging Operations

Imagine our editor contents consist of the following text, cursor, and
associated (simplified) id of each character:

image:images/char_ids.png?raw=true[Editor IDs]

In this example, rather than the local cursor being described as "at position
with offset 2", the cursor is instead "at position '360Zq'".

Say Joe and the local user type simultaneously. Rather than Joe's operation
being `insert(1, 'x')`, Joe's causal tree operation is `insert('360Zp', 'x')`.
The local user's operation is `insert('360Zq', 'y')` rather than `insert(2,
'y')`. With index-based operations and OT, one of them will be received by the
server before the other (say Joe's). The other (say the local user's) will need
to be *transformed* from `insert(2, 'y')` to `insert(3, 'y')`. But with a causal
tree CRDT, as long as causality is maintained i.e. this character exists before
this new one, the operations will merge to the same end result on both Joe's
editor and the local users'.

Deletes are handled by storing the deleted IDs in the character position before
the deletion. This allows inserts by other users at that deleted ID to maintain
their causal relationships, and therefore be positioned correctly within the
causal tree.

This greatly simplifies simultaneous operations, at the cost of significantly
greater disk and memory requirements. This is generally not an issue for text
content on modern machines, and compression, tombstone clearing, and indexing
mechanisms can be applied to reduce the performance overhead (Ritzy does not yet
do this).

In addition, with a causal tree, simultaneous offline editing -- extremely
difficult with OT and diff-match-patch algorithms -- is not only realistic, but
comes built-in.

==== Supported Operations ====

Currently, the supported operations are `insert`, `remove`, and `setAttributes`.
See
https://github.com/ritzyed/ritzy/blob/master/src/core/RichText.js[RichText.js].

[[swarmjs]]
=== Swarm.JS

The heavy lifting of the operation-based CRDT is done by
http://swarmjs.github.io/[Swarm.js], a Javascript library created by
https://github.com/gritzko[Victor Grishchenko]. On top of that base, Ritzy
implements a rich text CRDT.

Ritzy requires a NodeJS or io.js server running Swarm.js and bidirectionally
connected to each editor client via WebSockets or a long-polling mechanism. The
server is responsible for receiving changes from all editors and transmitting
them back to other editors. A simple server implementation is provided as part
of the Ritzy project.

[[surface]]
== JavaScript Surface and Layout Engine

The
https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Guide/HTML/Content_Editable[contentEditable]
attribute used by most editors allows the editor to delegate the capture of user
input and the display of the editor contents and selections to the browser. This
is "easy" and performs very well, but is https://vimeo.com/76219173[limited] and
https://medium.com/medium-eng/why-contenteditable-is-terrible-122d8a40e480[broken]
by browser capabilities and incompatibilities in `contentEditable`
implementations, and by the underlying HTML data model which is not suited for
collaborative editing. Instead, Ritzy implements a custom surface and layout
engine like Google Docs:

[quote, Jeff Harris (Google Docs Product Manager),http://googledrive.blogspot.ca/2010/05/whats-different-about-new-google-docs.html]
Let’s start by talking about the editing surface, which processes all user input
and makes the application feel like a regular editor. To you, the new editor
looks like a fairly normal text box. But from the browser’s perspective, it’s a
webpage with JavaScript that responds to any user action by dynamically changing
what to display on each line. For example, the cursor you see is actually a
thin, 2 pixel-wide div element that we manually place on the screen. When you
click somewhere, we find the x and y coordinates of your click and draw the
cursor at that position. This lets us do basic things like slanting the cursor
for italicized text, and it also allows more powerful capabilities like showing
multiple collaborators’ cursors simultaneously, in the same document.

[[surface_pros_cons]]
=== Pros and Cons

This approach is more flexible than `contentEditable`. The logic is consistent
across browsers, and there are no browser-specific workarounds for the document
model. The document model is only ever modified through explicit application
action (rather than by the browser as happens with contentEditable), ensuring
that the content of the internal document model is repeatable and consistent.

The document model is not HTML -- it is completely independent of the editor
surface. Therefore it should be easier to support applications that need to
customize the editor surface with new controls and/or behavior. Examples of this
would be inline spelling error notations or comments.

The downside is that having a custom editor surface unmanaged by the browser
requires significant complexity to do things the browser would normally provide
for free, such as: cursor motion and positioning (even blinking the cursor!),
dealing with accessibility concerns, non-left-to-right text orientations, user
inputs that are not raised as application events by the browser, dealing
correctly with touch-driven interfaces, and other such capabilities. While
cursor motion and positioning is implemented in Ritzy, some of the rest may be
impossible or at the very least, quite hard, to solve with this approach.

[[surface_editor]]
=== Editor Surface

The editor uses Facebook's http://facebook.github.io/react/[React] to manage
rendering for the editor surface. React is perfect for this purpose as most user
input and selection operations alter the surface only slightly -- to insert or
remove characters, to highlight selections, and to position the cursor. For each
of these, React can instruct the browser to make the minimum number of required
changes to the DOM that represents the editor surface. Since modifying the DOM
is an expensive operation performance-wise, React is key to Ritzy's smooth
performance. React's virtual DOM / state abstraction also makes code maintenance
simpler.

==== React Component Tree

Ritzy is a series of React components. The hierarchy of the components is:

* https://github.com/ritzyed/ritzy/blob/master/src/components/Editor.js[Editor]
** https://github.com/ritzyed/ritzy/blob/master/src/components/EditorLine.js[EditorLine]
(one per line in the state)
*** https://github.com/ritzyed/ritzy/blob/master/src/components/EditorLineContent.js[EditorLineContent]
*** https://github.com/ritzyed/ritzy/blob/master/src/components/SelectionOverlay.js[SelectionOverlay]
** https://github.com/ritzyed/ritzy/blob/master/src/components/Cursor.js[Cursor]
(one local cursor, and multiple remote cursors)
** https://github.com/ritzyed/ritzy/blob/master/src/components/DebugEditor.js[DebugEditor] (optional)

===== Flux Pattern

Ritzy uses the Facebook flux pattern -- all state changes are made by the
https://github.com/ritzyed/ritzy/blob/master/src/flux/EditorStore.js[EditorStore],
and all actions that trigger state changes, such as arrow keys or clicks, or
events from remote editors via Swarm.js, trigger an
https://github.com/ritzyed/ritzy/blob/master/src/flux/EditorActions.js[EditorAction].

The line state, cursor position, selection, and remote cursor positions and
selections are all part of the React Editor state. This state is updated by the
https://github.com/ritzyed/ritzy/blob/master/src/flux/EditorStore.js[EditorStore]
as local events are received such as arrow keys or clicks, or events from remote
editors via Swarm.js.

The Editor component listens to state changes from the EditorStore, causing
React to render the Editor component, which passes the required state subset to
the various child components as props. Thus only the DOM changes necessary to
reflect the new state are applied to the editor surface.

[[surface_layout]]
=== Layout

Managing the layout in JavaScript requires knowledge of the x-y positions of
individual characters, for example to position the cursor when the user clicks
on text, or to wrap text within the editor's bounding box.

For performance, Ritzy prefers using
http://nodebox.github.io/opentype.js/[Opentype.js] to obtain the required text
metrics from the underlying font, such as
http://www.freetype.org/freetype2/docs/glyphs/glyphs-3.html[advance widths] for
the glyphs that represent each character.

When the browser/OS platform supports linear subpixel positioning and faithfully
follows the font's instructions for it's text rendering, the font metrics are
sufficient to calculate x-y positions. However, on some browsers on some
platforms at some font sizes, for various complicated reasons the font metrics
are ignored in favor of http://goo.gl/yf3M7[hinting or other mechanisms]. In
these situations, the layout engine falls back to a slower but reliable
mechanism using the canvas `measureText` function. In addition, the canvas
`measureText` function is used to calculate the width of characters for which
the glyph is not available from the loaded font file.

To use the Opentype.js mechanism, all fonts displayed by Ritzy must be available
as TrueType or OpenType font files. Note that Opentype.js does not
https://github.com/nodebox/opentype.js/issues/43[currently support] WOFF font
files, but usually TrueType or OpenType equivalents are available. In addition,
the font is loaded into memory twice: by the browser and by Ritzy.

See
https://github.com/ritzyed/ritzy/blob/master/src/core/TextFontMetrics.js[TextFontMetrics.js]
for details of the font metrics calculations.
